# Registry Structure

The Registry is the machine-readable description of the Trust Framework and the Schemes within it. The Registry is a linked set of RDF Resources describing the component parts. The Registry also describes the rules and the technical standards that are used to exchange data between participants.

The Registry RDF resources are made available using four formats: RDF/XML; Turtle; JSON-LD; and a human readable version of the resources. Each resource within the Registry has a URL that is the unique identifier for that resource, and if the URL is viewed in a web browser, it will show the human readable interpretation of what the resource represents.

The resource URLs are embedded in the data, metadata, and audit records. To preserve the meaning of these records, once created, a Scheme should adopt a method of versioning resources.


## RDF Prefixes

This specification uses the following prefixes:

```
  rdf:     http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#
  rdfs:    http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#
  ib1:     https://registry.trust.ib1.org/ns/1.0#
```


## Trust Framework Description

### ib1:TrustFramework

An `ib1:TrustFramework` resource describes an IB1 Trust Framework.

`rdfs:label`
: The abbreviated name or acronym of the Trust Framework, used as a symbol to identify the Trust Framework in URL paths and hostnames.

`rdfs:comment`
: The full human readable name of the Trust Framework.


### ib1:Scheme

An `ib1:Scheme` resource describes a Scheme within a Trust Framework.

`rdfs:label`
: The abbreviated name or acronym of the Scheme, used as a symbol to identify the Scheme in URL paths.

`rdfs:comment`
: The full human readable name of the Scheme.

`ib1:trustFramework`
: The URL of the Trust Framework to which this Scheme belongs.


### ib1:Specification

An `ib1:Specification` represents a formal document that defines technical standards, interfaces, or detailed requirements relevant to a Scheme.

Specifications record the authoritative text of the standard and are linked to by the Scheme's `ib1:TechnicalProfile` to indicate that the Scheme adopts and relies on that standard.

`rdfs:label`
: A short identifier for the specification, typically used in the path of the resource URL.

`rdfs:comment`
: A human readable description of the specification and its purpose.

`ib1:trustFramework`
: The URL of the Trust Framework which governs this specification.

`ib1:scheme`
: The URL of the Scheme that has defined this Specification.

`ib1:specificationText`
: The URL of a human-readable document that contains the text of the specification. The document should be managed by the Registry publication process, and may be in Markdown or PDF format.


### ib1:TechnicalProfile

An `ib1:TechnicalProfile` lists the technical specifications that are used by a Trust Framework or Scheme.

As Schemes are intended to be generally interoperable, the Trust Framework will specify a Technical Profile, and each Scheme's Technical Profile will generally be a superset of the Trust Framework's Technical Profile.

`rdfs:label`
: An abbreviated name for the Technical Profile.

`rdfs:comment`
: The full human readable name of the Technical Profile.

`ib1:trustFramework`
: The URL of the Trust Framework.

`ib1:Scheme`
: If this is a Scheme Technical Profile, the URL of the Scheme. `ib1:trustFramework` must be present and match the `ib1:trustFramework` of the `ib1:Scheme` resource.

`ib1:uses`
: One or more URLs referencing technical specifications used by a Trust Framework or Scheme. These may point to externally defined standards or to an `ib1:Specification` published within this `ib1:scheme`.


### ib1:PolicyPurpose

An `ib1:PolicyPurpose` resource defines a formal purpose or role that a policy may fulfill within a Scheme or Trust Framework. These resources are used as controlled identifiers in the `ib1:policyPurpose` field of `ib1:Policy` instances.

`rdfs:label`
: An abbreviated name for the policy purpose.

`rdfs:comment`
: A human-readable description of the intended function of this policy purpose.

#### Standard ib1:PolicyPurpose URLs

`https://registry.trust.ib1.org/policy-purpose/DataProtection`
: A policy for compliance with data protection legislation, for example, GDPR.

`https://registry.trust.ib1.org/policy-purpose/Operational`
: A policy to address the operation of the Scheme.

`https://registry.trust.ib1.org/policy-purpose/Legal`
: A policy to address legal requirements.


## Common terms

Registry resources all use common terms to identify the resource within a Scheme.

`rdfs:label`
: A short identifier for the resource, typically used in the path of the resource URL.

`rdfs:comment`
: A human readable description of the resource.

`ib1:trustFramework`
: The URL of the Trust Framework which governs this resource.

`ib1:scheme`
: The URL of the Scheme which governs this resource.


## Scheme Description

Scheme description resources describe the elements within that Scheme.

All scheme description resources use the common terms.


### ib1:Role

An `ib1:Role` identifies a Role within the Scheme that can be assigned to Scheme members.

As the URL is used to identify this Role in long lived data structures, any versioning scheme must not change the URL.


### ib1:Agreement

An `ib1:Agreement` represents a legal agreement which may be executed by Scheme members. Execution is recorded in the Directory.

`ib1:agreementText`
: The URL of a human readable document with the text of the agreement. The document should be managed by the Registry publication process.


### ib1:Policy

An `ib1:Policy` represents a policy which the Scheme members must follow. All Policies in the Registry apply to all members of the Scheme.

Policies may be either:

 * Human-readable documents referenced via `ib1:policyText`, or
 * Fully machine-readable policies defined directly using additional RDF terms.

All `ib1:Policy` resources MUST include an `ib1:policyPurpose`, and MAY include other descriptive or functional properties.

`ib1:policyPurpose`
: A Registry URL that identifies the intended purpose or required role of the policy within the Scheme or Trust Framework. This value is used to enable unambiguous identification of a specific policy when referenced by external specifications, rules, or technical profiles. The URL MUST refer to an `ib1:PolicyPurpose` resource published in a Registry that defines the policy purpose.

`ib1:policyText`
: For human-readable policies, the URL of a human readable document with the text of the policy. The document should be managed by the Registry publication process.

Additional terms may be defined by Specifications to express machine-readable rules or constraints for specific policy types.


## Scheme Identifiers

Identifiers are used within Scheme specific technical specifications and APIs. Their identifiers should be URLs within the Registry wherever possible, and use classes defined in the `ib1:` namespace where these apply.

As identifier URLs are used in long lived data structures, any versioning scheme must not change the URLs.

All identifiers use the common terms.


### ib1:SourceType

An identifier to describe the type of source of data.


### ib1:DatasetAssuranceLevel

An identifier for an Assurance Level.


### ib1:SensitivityClassRequirement

An identifier for a technical requirement for data within a given sensitivity class. Where possible, Schemes should use the identifiers defined in the `ib1:` namespace.


### ib1:SensitivityClass

An identifier for a Sensitivity Class, with a description of the technical requirements when processing data in this class.

`ib1:sensitivityClassRequirement`
: Zero or more `ib1:SensitivityClassRequirement` URLs.



