# OAuth with Member Identity Certificates

The Trust Framework uses OAuth to authorise access to APIs which provide access to data that requires Permission from the end-user.

All server-to-server communication is secured with mTLS using client certificates, where the client is identified by a URL in the client x509 certificate as the single URI type Subject Alternative Name.

## OAuth Profile

The Trust Framework uses a FAPI 2 compliant profile within the [FAPI 2.0 Security Profile](https://openid.net/specs/fapi-security-profile-2_0-final.html) specification.

### Profile options

The following options within the FAPI 2 profile are used:

 * MTLS is required on all server-to-server communication endpoints.
 * OAuth endpoints use the `tls_client_auth` method.
 * PKCE is used with the S256 code challenge method.
 * TLS 1.3 is required.
 * The Registry License URL is used as the `scope`, which provides the necessary information for informed consent.
 * The `client_id` is the Directory URL from the client x509 certificate, and must match the presented client certificate. The `client_secret` is not used.
 * Tokens are bound to the Directory URL from the certificate (not the exact certificate) by requiring that the `client_id` matches the certificate.

When this specification is used with another Trust Framework specification, these requirements may not be varied.

### Unused options

The following FAPI 2 options are **not** used:

 * Dynamic Client Registration (the Directory issued certificate provides all client information)
 * OpenID Connect (no end user identifier is passed to the clients)
 * Rich Authorization Requests (the License URL requires no further authorization data)
 * Access and refresh tokens need not be JWTs, as long as the tokens are bound to the URL of the client certificates.
 * The additional `x-fapi-*` headers defined in the [FAPI 2 implementation advice](https://openid.bitbucket.io/fapi/fapi-2_0-implementation_advice.html), as better functionality is provided by other Trust Framework specifications.

When this specification is used with another Trust Framework specification, these options may be used.

### OAuth Issuer Endpoints

The OAuth Issuer must implement the `pushed_authorization_request`, `authorization` and `token` endpoints.

The `userinfo` and `registration` endpoints must not be implemented.

Other endpoints may be implemented, for example, `introspection`, if they are restricted to use by the Member's internal systems only.

## OAuth Issuer Metadata

This profile requires that the OAuth Issuer publishes metadata according to [RFC8414](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8414.html) at the [standard location](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8414.html#section-3) formed by inserting `/.well-known/oauth-authorization-server` between the host and path components of the authorization server's issuer identifier.

For example, the issuer `https://auth.example.org/accounts` would publish metadata at `https://auth.example.org/.well-known/oauth-authorization-server/accounts`.

The profile requires the metadata has the following values:

``` json
{
  "mtls_endpoint_aliases": {
    // Must be exactly the same as the *_endpoint values defined at the top level
  },
  "use_mtls_endpoint_aliases": true,
  "require_pushed_authorization_requests": true,
  "tls_client_certificate_bound_access_tokens": true,
  "response_types_supported": ["code"],
  "authorization_endpoint_auth_methods_supported": ["tls_client_auth"],
  "token_endpoint_auth_methods_supported": ["tls_client_auth"]
  // No equivalent for pushed_authorization_request_endpoint
}
```

Any `*_endpoint` value must be repeated exactly within the `mtls_endpoint_aliases` property so the aliased and unaliased values are equal. For example:

``` json
{
  "issuer": "https://auth.example.org/accounts",
  "authorization_endpoint": "https://auth.example.org/accounts/authorization",
  "token_endpoint": "https://auth.example.org/accounts/token",
  "pushed_authorization_request_endpoint": "https://auth.example.org/accounts/par",
  "mtls_endpoint_aliases": {
    "authorization_endpoint": "https://auth.example.org/accounts/authorization",
    "token_endpoint": "https://auth.example.org/accounts/token",
    "pushed_authorization_request_endpoint": "https://auth.example.org/accounts/par"
  }
}
```

## OAuth Flow

### Pushed Authorization Request

The Client starts the flow by making a Pushed Authorization Request to the `pushed_authorization_request_endpoint` URL using MTLS,

 * requesting a `code` response,
 * specifying a Directory URL as the `client_id`, which must match the URL in their MTLS client certificate,
 * including a PKCE `code_challenge`,
 * setting the `scope` to a Registry License URL,
 * and include a `redirect_uri`, which does not have to be pre-registered.
 
Precautions must be taken to avoid creating an open redirect, in particular by not including attacker controlled values in the `redirect_uri`.

```
POST /accounts/par HTTP/1.1
Host: auth.example.org
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

response_type=code
&client_id=https%3A%2F%2Fdirectory.core.trust.ib1.org%2Fapplication%2F38328a78
&code_challenge=E9Melhoa2OwvFrEMTJguCHaoeK1t8URWbuGJSstw-cM
&code_challenge_method=S256
&scope=https%3A%2F%2Fregistry.core.trust.ib1.org%2Fscheme%2Felectricity%2Flicense%2Fsmart-meter%2F2025-02-06
&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fapp1.consumer.example.com%2Fcb
&state=WFqUWTVvX49tM
```

The Issuer will respond with a `request_uri`:

```
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Cache-Control: no-cache, no-store
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "request_uri": "urn:example:bwc4JK-ESC0w8acc191e-Y1LTC2",
  "expires_in": 90
}
```

### Redirection of User Agent to Issuer user interface

The Client forms a URL using the `authorization_endpoint`, their Directory URL, and the `request_uri`, and redirect's the end user's User Agent to that URL:

```
https://auth.example.org/accounts/authorization?
  client_id=https%3A%2F%2Fdirectory.core.trust.ib1.org%2Fapplication%2F38328a78
  &request_uri=urn%3Aexample%3Abwc4JK-ESC0w8acc191e-Y1LTC2
```

This Issuer URL will use a public CA to present a certificate accepted by the end user's browser (even though the endpoint URL is included in the `mtls_endpoint_aliases` section).

### Redirection of User Agent to Client Application

After the OAuth Issuer has authenticated the end user, it will redirect the end user's User Agent back to the Client with the authorization code and `state` parameter from the PAR.

```
https://app1.consumer.example.com/cb?code=Mo9iP1GkbP7P0Cut58JOH9SVHc
  &state=WFqUWTVvX49tM
```

### Exchange authorization code for tokens

The Client uses the `token_endpoint` URL with MTLS to exchange the authorization code for access and refresh tokens, with

 * the `code` returned by the Issuer to the `redirect_uri`,
 * the PKCE `code_verifier`,
 * the Directory URL `client_id` matching the MTLS client certificate,
 * the `redirect_uri` from the PAR.

```
POST /accounts/token HTTP/1.1
Host: auth.example.org
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

grant_type=authorization_code
&code=Mo9iP1GkbP7P0Cut58JOH9SVHc
&code_verifier=dBjftJeZ4CVP-mB92K27uhbUJU1p1r_wW1gFWFOEjXk
&client_id=https%3A%2F%2Fdirectory.core.trust.ib1.org%2Fapplication%2F38328a78
&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fapp1.consumer.example.com%2Fcb
```

The Issuer will respond with the access and refresh tokens.

### Use of access and refresh tokens

Both the OAuth `token_endpoint` and the resource server must check that the URL in the MTLS client certificate matches the `client_id` of the token.

